an old, but still vital concept, that each patient¡¸s tumor is
a heterogeneous population of cells,some of which
have more tumorigenic and metastatic potential than
others (Al-Hajj et al,2003). In recent years,this has
evolved into the concept of the¡°cancer stem cell¡°that
is believed to constitute the population that is ultimately
responsible for perpetuating the tumor. These cells have
many properties common to normal stem cells, but their
exact origins remain controversial (Bjerkvig et al., 2005),
Currently, most researchers seem to favor the view that
a range of cells in normal cell renewing systems, from
the ultimate stem cellstoasubsequent series of precursor
and progenitor cells, have the potential to constitute the
focal transformation point for individual cancers. This
could, in fact, explain the existence of many subtypes of
major tumor types such as lung and breast canCcers,

Intheabove context,ifepigenetic cancer gene silencing
might begin in a cancer stem cell, this would dictate that
many such changes constitute early events in tumor progression and might have their molecular origins tied to
stem/precursor cell population characteristics. We have
discussed, in this review, a body of solid evidence for
the former point and exciting concepts are emerging for
the latter. We have mentioned earlier that long-term silencing ofgenesinembryonicstem (ES) cellsis undercontrol of the polycomb complexes of proteins (PcG), which
actinconcertforlong-term maintenance oftranscriptional
repression. The PcG complex,PRC2, is involved in the
initiation of silencing and contains EZH2,the histone
methyltransferase that places the histone methylation
modification, HekK27me (Orlando, 2003; Pirrotta and Gross,
2005; Ringrose and Paro, 2004; see also the Review by
B. Schuettengruber et al., page 735 in this issue). In turn,
this mark can attract the PRC1 complexes that maintain
the silencing (Orlando,2003; Pirrotta and GrosSs, 2005;
Ringrose and Paro, 2004). The PRC1 complexes contain
chromo domain proteins such as the CBX family (Bernstein et al., 2006b) that recognize the HeK27me mark,
and the key stem cell protein Bmil,which can silence
the p16 gene (discussed earlier as a key gene epigenetically silenced early in cancers [Valk-Lingbeek et al., 2004:;
varambally et al., 2002]). Steady-state levelSs of EZH2,
Bmil, and other PcG complex members are increased in
cancer (Bracken et al., 2003; Varambally et al.,2002),
Enrichment of EZH2 and the H3K27me mark is a property
of the promoters of DNA hypermethylated and silenced
genes (McGarvey et al., 2006), as is the sirtuin deactylase
SIRT1 (Pruitt etal.,, 2006), which has been associated with
PRC2 complexes found in stem and cancer cells (Kuzmichev et al,, 2005),

Thus, dysregulation of the PcG system potentially links
cancer formation to stem cell biology (Valk-Lingbeek
etal., 2004).Alarge groupofgenes is marked by PcG control in ES cells (Boyer et al., 2006; Lee et al., 2006), as wel|
as inothermorecommitted stem/precursor cells (Bracken
et al., 2006; see also the Review by M.A. Surani et al.,
page747 inthisissue).Thismarking appears to hold these
genes at a transcription level redguired by the ES cell state

688 ¡°_Cell 128, 683-~-692, February 23, 2007 @2007 EIlsevier InC.

until needed for up- or downregulation of the genes in
more_committed progeny (Bernstein et al.,2006a:;
Bracken et al., 2006). The PcG system has been incriminated in targeting DNA methylation for locking in gene
silencing (Vire et al., 2006). If borne out in subsequent
studies, itis appealing to consider that this targeting of silencing, in concert with other histone modifications such
as H3K9 methylation (Tamaru and Selker, 2003), may be
a link between stem cell biology, promoter DNA hypermethylation, and gene silencing in cancer. If, in mature cell
renewal populations,survivalresponsestochronic inflammationandaging involvestem/precursorcells,thenthe set
of PcG marked genes may render genes vulnerable to abnormalDNAmethylation.Indeed,very recentfindings have
shownthatstem cell PcG targets are 20-fold more likely to
have cancer-specific promoter methylation than nontargets, supporting a stem cell origin for cancer (J.E. Ohm
etal., submitted; Widschwendter et al., 2007; Schlesinger
etal., 2007).The resultanttight heritable gene silencing for
the genes we have been discussing may then abnormally
hold cells in stem/precursor cell states, allowing them to
participate in early steps in neoplastic progression.

The Potential of Epigenetic Therapeutics

The fact that epigenetic changes are so prevalent in
cancers and play a causative role in their biologies has
led to the development of an entirely new therapeutic approach in which the goal is to reverse gene silencing. It is
30 years since the first description of the remarkable
effects of azanucleoside drugs on the differentiated state
of cells (Constantinides et al., 1977). It is now clear that
these compounds function as inhibitors ofthe DNA methyltransferase enzymes (Santi et al., 1983). Nevertheless,
it has taken three decades for the drugs to be approved
by the United States Food and Drug Administration for
the treatment of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Other
nucleoside inhibitors of DNA methylation,including 5fluoro-2¡¸-deoxycytidine (Jones and Taylor,1980) and
zebularine (Cheng et al., 2004),, are at an earlier stage of
development.

Given that nucleosides require incorporation into DNA
in order to be fully effective, there have been several
attempts to find other inhibitors of DNA methylation that
might act without incorporation into DNA. Although procainamide (Cornacchia et al., 1988) and tea polyphenols
(Fang et al., 2003) have been reported to be DNA methylation inhibitors, they are, at best, weak inhibitors in living
cells (Chuang et al., 2005),and research to discover other
inhibitors remainsa high priority. The recent description of
the drug RG101 is a promising development of a lead
compound that might be effective as a DNA methylation
inhibitor (Brueckner et al., 2005),

The demonstration that histone deacetylase inhibitors
have antitumor potential (Marks et al., 2001; Minucci and
Pelicci, 2006) has led to the development of a series of
inhibitors. The first of these,SAHA,has just been approved by the FDA for the treatment of T cell cutaneous
lymphoma,and several drug companies are actively
