such as removal of methylated cytosine binding proteins
(Bakker et al., 2002) or the deacetylase,SIRT1 (Pruitt
et al., 2006),

The driving force in DNA methylation research, particularly as itrelatestocancer,has, untilnow, been particularly
focused on CpG island promoter methylation. However, it
remains true that about 409%6 ofhuman genes do not contain bona fide CpG islands in their promoters (Takai and
Jones, 2002). The reason for the focus on islands is because ofthe demonstrable ability of CpG-island promoter
methylationto permanently silence genes both physiologically and pathologically in mammalian cells. The role of
methylationin non-CpG island promoters has been largely
overlooked because the mechanistic links have not been
sowelldemonstrated. Recent work has shown strong correlations between tissue-specific expression and methylation of non-CpG islands, including,for example, the
maspin gene (Futscher et al., 2002). Maspin has a CpG
rich promoter that does not meet established criteria for
a CpG island (Takai and Jones, 2002). There are other examples of genes, such as the MAGE gene family, that are
commonly upregulated by epigenetictherapy in which the
promoters do not satisfy recognized criteria for¡°islandness.¡°¡¸ Indeed,recent DNAmethylation profiling of human
chromosomes 6, 20, and 22 has shown that 179%6 of 873
analyzed genes are differentially methylated and that
about a third of these show inverse correlations between
methylation and transcription (Eckhardtetal., 2006). While
it has not been rigorously established that cytosine methylation in such promoters causally blocks transcription, it
is also true that this possibility has not been excluded.
There is clearly room for more work on the CpG poor
genes in which cytosine methylation could also play
a role in normal development as well as in cancer.

The importance of DNA methylation in cancer has been
established (Jones and Baylin,2002; Jones and Laird,
1999),, and the focus in the field is changing to include
the mechanisms by which other chromatin modifications
play a role in cancer development (Figure 1). Foremost
among these are the covalent modifications of histones
that can control gene activity. For example, histone deacetylation and methylation of specific I|ysine residues
such as lysine 9 in histone H3 or lysine 27 in histone H3
clearly participate in the silencing of genes (Jenuwein,
2006; see also the Review by B. Li et al., page 707 in
this issue),

Akey link betweenthese covalent histone modifications
and DNA methylation was established by the pioneering
experiments of Nan et al. (1998) and Jones et al. (1998)
whoshowedthat cytosine methylation could attractmethylated DNA binding proteins and histone deacetylases to
methylated CpG islands during chromatin compaction
and gene silencing. More recently, howevern, the link between covalent histone modifications and nucleosomal
remodeling is increasingly being explored. Zhang et al
(1999) showed that DNA methylation binding protein
(MBD2) interacts with the nucleosomal remodeling complex (NuRD) and directs the complex to methylate DNA.

684 ¡°_Cell 128, 683-~-692, February 23, 2007 @2007 EIlsevier InC.

DNA
methylation

¡¸

Gene silencing

HDACs
/ \ HM 1s
Histone
modifications

N URFS

Nucleosome
remodeling

Figure 1. Gene Silencing in Normal Cells

Heritable gene silencing involves, among other processes, the interplay between DNA methylation, histone covalent modifications, and
nucleosomal remodeling. Some of the enzymes that contribute to
these modifications include DNA methyltransferase (DNMTs), histone
deacetylases (HDACs), histone methyltransferases (HMTs), and complex nucleosomal remodeling factors (NURFs). The interplay between
these processes establishes a heritable repressive state at the start
site of genes resulting in gene silencing. Physiologically, silencing is
critical for development and differentiation. Pathologically, silencing
leads to diseases such as cancer. Recent evidence suggests global
changes in allthree processes in cancer, perhaps reflecting their interrelationships.

Harikrishnan et al. (2005) showed that Brahma (Brm),
which is a catalytic component of the SWIMSNF chromatin-remodeling complex, associates with the methylated
DNA binding protein MeCP2. These experiments provide
a potential link between DNA methylation and chromatin
silencing. Very recent studies have shown that covalent
modifications of histones couple these processes with
chromatin remodeling by ATP-dependent remodeling
machines (Li et al., 2006; Wysocka et al., 2006). This has
led to the realization thatthe three processes of DNA cytosine methylation, histone modification, and nucleosomal
remodeling are intimately linked and that alterations in
these processes result in the permanent silencing of
cancer-relevant genes (Figure 1),

The fact that nucleosomal remodeling is a key componenttothe epigenetic silencing in cancer has been known
forsome time.Ithas beendirectly shownthat mutations in
the SWIMSNF complex play causative roles in the development of certain kinds of human cancer. Mutations in the
SNF5 gene stimulate cell-cycle progression and cooperate with p53 loss in oncogenic transformation, and they
are also associated with inactivation of the p21 and bp16
pathways (Chai et al., 2005; Roberts and Orkin,2004),
Once again,these changes may in fact be quite extensive
in the epigenome.

Global Changes in the Cancer Epigenome

The occurrence of localized changes in chromatin structure at transcriptional start sites has been well appreciated; however, it is now emerging that the alterations are
