Strategies for epigenetic therapy

PR1IMARY SECONDARY
TREATMENT TREATMENT
Tumor
stasis

Apoptosis f
_

cCancer stem

丞 d

DNMT 一 一 一 一 MLH1f 一 一 Chemotherapy 一 、_

_
]!二'_[日J_「]丨:露r_[5膏

Tumor antigenf 一 <Immunotherapy '-'′'郦""'_'′

DNMT + HDACYI

|
\ MicroRNAs f

Act synergisticall
一 ynerg y
Debulk tumor 一 - DNIMTi 一 - 一 \

Chemotherapy

pursuing new histone deacetylaseinhibitors (Bolden
et al,, 2006).

The histone methyltransferases represent another valid
targetforthediscovery ofnew drugs that can reactivate silenced genes.Somelead compoundsarealready being investigated, and itis likely that these would activate genes
either as single agents orin combination with other epigenetic drugs. In this regard, it is likely that the future of
epigenetic therapy will involve the utilization of multiple
drugs that individually affect epigenetic silencing but
that might be expected to have synergistic effects (Figure 4). Because of the interrelationships between epigenetic processes involved in silencing (Figure 1 ) and the
demonstrated synergistic activities of DNA methylation
and HDAC inhibitors (Cameron et al., 1999; Suzuki et al.,
2004; Yamashita et al., 2002), there is much interest in
combination therapies (Figure 4). These are now being
tested in clinical trials,as are combinations ofthese inhibitors with standard chemotherapeutic regimens. Knowing
about the potential importance of epigenetic silencing to
cancer stem cells, more innovative approaches to removing these cancer progenitors might be possible. Cancer
stem cells, refractory to standard chemotherapy,might
be induced to differentiate by chronic administration of
epigeneticdrugs,asshown in Figure 4.Also,the activation
ofepigeneticallysilencedtumorsuppressor miRNAs might
allow for new treatment modalities (Saito et al., 2006),

A major impediment to the use of such drugs is that
they are nonspecific and would be anticipated to reactivate genes nondiscriminately. However, this may not be
as much ofa problem as it seems, because DNA methyl|ation inhibitors only act on dividing cells, leaving nondividing normal cells unaffected. Also,itappears that the drugs
preferentially activate genes that have become abnormally silenced in cancer (Karpf et al., 1999; Liang et al.,
2002). The reason for this is not clear but may be related
to the fact that the chromatin structure associated with
a pathologically silenced gene may be more susceptible

Figure _4.Strategies “for Epigenetic
Therapy

Epigenetic therapy with DNA methylation inhibitors (DNMTi) and HDAC inhibitors (HDACi
is now a reality. While these agents are currently approved as single agents, combination
therapies are likely to gain traction in the future
because of the inherent self-reinforcing nature
ofsilencing mechanisms (see Figure 1). Future
breakthroughs could come from the use of
epigenetic drugs to activate miRNAs or the
use of drugs to target cancer stem cells after
tumor debulking by standard chemotherapy.

Cells

differentiate

to reactivationthanthe highly compacted chromatin state
induced by _physiological silencing.、Nevertheless, the
search for _ more specific targeted therapies remains
a high priority.

Conclusions

As the role of epigenetics in cancer becomes clearer and
the interrelationships between chromatin components
are increasingly understood,we are at a good point to
reevaluate our approaches to cancer prevention, deteCtion, and therapy. It is clear that cancer cells have global
changes in chromatin constitution involving the whole epigenome and that entire pathways relevant to cell renewal
are subject to epigenetic dysregulation. The exciting links
between epigenetics and stem cell behavior are just becoming manifest and are involved at the very earliest
stages oftumor progression. This gives an important window on therapeutic intervention through prevention strategies. The approval of three, albeit nonspecific, drugs for
therapy of established tumors gives new promise not only
inthisarena butalso for new prevention strategies as well
Perhaps, as we continue to explore the molecular regulation of chromatin in both normal and neoplastic settings;,
we will become smarter in the use ofagents to target cancerstem cells or miRNAs,forexample,to make further inroads in resetting epigenetic abnormalities and achieving
control of cancer.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Supported by grants R01 CA083867/R01 CA082422 (P.A.JJ) and R01
CA04318/R0O1 CA116160 (S.B.B.) from the National Cancer Institute
and R0O1 ES011858 from the National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences (S.B.B.).The authors thank G. Liang for help with the figures:.

REFERENCES

Akiyama,Y., Watkins, N., Suzuki, H., Jair, K.W.,van Engeland,M.,
Esteller,M.,Sakai,H.,Ren,C.Y.,Yuasa,Y.,Herman, JG.,and

Cell 128, 683-692, February 23, 2007 @2007 Elsevier Inc.。 689
