Leading Edge

The Epigenomics of Cancer

Peter A. Jonesr¡¸* and Stephen B. Baylin¡°*

¡°Department of Urology, Biochemistry, and Molecular Biology, USC/Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA
^Cancer Biology Program, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,

MD 21231, USA

*Correspondence: jones_p@ccnt.usc.edu (P.A.J.j), sbaylin@jhmiedu (S.B.B.)

DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2007.01.029

Aberrant gene function and altered patterns of gene expression are key features of cancer.
Growing evidence shows that acquired epigenetic abnormalities participate with genetic
alterations to cause this dysregulation. Here, we review recent advances in understanding
how epigenetic alterations participate in the earliest stages of neoplasia, including stemy
precursor cell contributions, and discuss the growing implications of these advances for

strategies to control cancer.

For decades, scientists have been engaged in dissecting
the origins of human cancer, and the relative roles of genetic versus epigenetic abnormalities have been hotly
debated. An explosion of data indicating the importance
of epigenetic processes, especially those resulting in the
silencing of key regulatory genes, has led to the realization
that genetics and epigenetics cooperate at all stages of
cancerdevelopment. Recent advances include the understanding that silencing is part of global epigenomic alterations in cancer,that pathways relevant to stem cell
growth and differentiation become altered,and the
approval ofthree drugs that target these defects in cancer
patients.

Gene Silencing and Cancer

Epigenetics is defined as heritable changes in gene expression that are not accompanied by changes in DNA
sequence. Gene silencing at the levelofchromatin is neCcessary for the life of eukaryotic organisms and is particularly important in orchestrating key biological processes,
including differentiation, imprinting, and silencing of large
chromosomal domains such as the X chromosome, over
the life span offemalemammals. In many species, silencing can be initiated and maintained solely by processes
involving the covalent modifications of histones and other
chromatin components. Vertebrates, however,have taken
advantage of the heritability of DNA cytosine methylation patterns to add another layer of control to these
processes.

Like most biological processes, silencing can become
dysregulated,resulting in the development of disease
states. It can also result in the acquired inactivation of
genes during normal aging. A key property of silencing is
that it can spread over genomic regions in a progressive
way, as perhaps bestexemplified by position-effect variegation in Drosophila.Iltseems to involve the cooperation of
multiple processes, including noncoding RNAs, covalent
modifications of chromatin, physical alterations in nucleosomal positioning, and DNA methylation, among others.

Ilt must be appreciated, as we will outline, that epigenetic abnormalities in cancer comprise a multitude of
aberrations in virtually every component of chromatin involved in packaging the human genome. Since epigenetic
silencing processes are mitotically heritable,they can play
thesame roles and undergo the same selective processes
as genetic alterations in the development of a cancer. A
principal tenet of Darwin¡¸s hypotheses for the evolution
ofspeciesisthat mostgermline mutations are deleterious,
or of no functional significance; mutations give rise to
a specific advantage selected for in an evolving population. These same selective concepts apply for epigenetic
events, which can occur at a much more increased rate
compared to mutations in somatic cells. Alterations in
gene expression induced by epigenetic events,which
give rise to a cellular growth advantage, are therefore selected forinthe hostorgan,resulting inthe progressive uncontrolled growth ofthetumor. This does not mean that all
silenced genes play direct roles,since itis becoming clear,
as we will discuss later, that whole groups of genes may
be inactivated as part of an abnormal¡°¡°program.¡°Epigenetic changes can collaborate with genetic changes to
cause the evolution of a cancer because they are mitotically heritable. The high degree of mitotic stablility of silencing coupled with the progressive nature by which it
is achieved makes pathological silencing of growth controlling and other genes an essential part of the development of a human cancer.

The Importance of Chromatin Remodeling

Muchisnow knownaboutthe importance of promoter cytosine methylation in CpG islands and gene silencing, and
it has been established beyond doubt that such methylation is intimately involved in cancer development. As discussed later,many hundreds of genes may be inactivated
in a single cancer by promoter methylation. In general
methylated CpG islands are not capable of the initiation
oftranscription unless the methylation signal can be overridden by alterations in factors that modulate chromatin,

Cell 128, 683-692, February 23, 2007 @2007 Elsevier Inc.¡£ 683
