Additional
] Differentiation gene
silencing

/

Stem/precursor cell stress survival

(Jones and Baylin, 2002). Also, mutations and epigenetic
silencing of E-cadherin are mutually exclusive in the lobular and ductal forms of breast cancer, respectively (Graff
et al., 1995),

Despite the above similarities between genetic and
epigenetic gene loss of function in cancer, there is an
importantemerging theme that, unlike for mutations, multiple epigenetic events may freqguently affect a single-cel
pathway (Figure 3). These changes may function as networks in which multiple genes are not only affected within
a pathway butcan generate alterations ofother key signaling pathways and even involve epigenetic events that
cause other epigenetic events. Thus,these epigenetic
abnormalities form a more nuanced, integrated disruption
of pathways than do gene mutations to foster tumorigenesis (Figure 3).Afirst example is the previously mentioned
silencing of the four SFRP genes and their interactions
with Wnt pathway gene mutations. Asecond is the silencing ofp16ink4A,which, in addition to disrupting the cyclin
D-Rb cell-cycle control pathway,may foster recruitment
of silencing complexes through other means and cause
abnormal DNA methylation to the promoter of a HOX
gene (Reynolds et al., 2006) (Figure 3). It may be that
this loss of transcriptional activation of the downstream
genes renders them susceptible to heritable silencing
through adoption of the types of repressive promoter
chromatin, which will be revisited below.

Perhaps one of the most complex series of events for
networks of epigenetic abnormalities in cancers involves
the loss of HIC1 function and the resultant potential
survival events (Figure 2). As recently reviewed (Baylin
and Ohm, 2006),the increases in SIRT1 may prolong cell
survivalthroughmultiplemechanisms,including downmodulation of p53 function through deacetylation of this
target protein. In addition,through mechanisms including
deacetylation of the histone residue,H4K16, the yeast
SIRT1 ortholog, Sir2, is an important participant in gene
silencing (Guarente,2000; Kimura et al.,2002; Suka
etal., 2002).Itappearsthatthisisalsothe case in humans,
including those genes that are DNA hypermethylated and
silenced in cancer (Pruitt et al., 2006). Thus, increases in
SIRT1 appear important for silencing of genes including

fGenomic instability
and additional
gene silencing

Figure 3. Networks of Gene-Silencing
Events

Such networks help to foster early and later
steps during neoplastic progression. Examples of early gene silencing (red X) occur at
multiple points in key tumor control pathways
to allow abnormal cell survival after stress
and early clonal expansion. These epigenetic
events are shown as provoking disruptive
crosstalk between the pathways facilitating
this expansion.Examples of gene-silencing
events that foster subsequent silencing events
(green arrows linking SIRT1 to silencing of
GATA-4 and -5 and SFRPs) are depicted.

the SFRPs, where the loss can upregulate the Wnt pathway,again facilitating cellsurvivalin tumors such as colon
(Figure 2). Finally, HIC1 itself has been shown to normally
sequestern, in the nucleus, transcription factors that drive
the Wnt pathway. Thus, loss can free these for increased
Wnt pathway function (Valenta et al., 2006),

lt is then apparent that from the earliest stages of neoplastic development, epigenetic changes can, just as for
gene mutations, perturb multiple key pathways in ways
that foster cancer risk and evolution. As more and more
cancer genes are discovered, which are functionally altered via epigenetic mechanisms, these pathwaySs, and
the links between them, will undoubtedly be even further
appreciated.

The¡°Cancer Stem Cell¡° Hypothesis

Much of the recent work, including information derived
from random screens to discover DNA hypermethylated
cancer genes and the deciphering of networks of silenced
genes, indicate that hundreds of epigenetically silenced
genes possibly exist even in individual tumors. While it is
conceivable that selection for stochastic events could
account for this, it seems unlikely that all of the changes
observed arise in such a random fashion and then come
todominate thetumor clone through selective advantage,
Perhaps, just as multiple mutations arising in tumors secondary to central defects in genetic control programs,
such as mismatch repair deficiency states, are not all
directly important for tumor progression, the existence
ofmultiple epigenetically silenced genes might reflect programs of epigenetic control abnormalities. Some might
even be derived from genetic alterations that dictate
abnormal chromatin regulation.

What could account for these early epigenetic silencing
events and the many genes that appear to be involved ,
which may be key steps in the earliest phases of neoplastic evolution? As has been reviewed recently (Baylin and
Ohm, 2006), one possibility concerns a role for the control
of expression of groups of genes at the chromatin level,
which is integral to the maintenance of cells in a stem
cell state. The contribution of a stem cell state is integral
to current thinking in the cancer biology field relative to

Cell 128, 683-692, February 23, 2007 @2007 Elsevier Inc.¡£ 687
