genome wide. Indeed, early studies pointed to an overall
decrease in the 5-methylcytosine content of cancer
genomes (Feinberg and Tycko, 2004; Riggs and Jones,
1983).The hypermethylation consistently observed in
CpG islands therefore represents a change in 5-methylcytosine distribution across the genome rather than an
overall increase in the total amount of methylation. Interestingly, it has recently been found that large stretches
of DNA can become abnormally methylated in cancer
(Frigola et al,, 2006),

Thechangesin CpG-island methylation in single tumors
can involve a group of loci and has been hypothesized to
constitute a distinct phenotype, first proposed by Toyota
et al. (1999) as the¡°CpG island methylator phenotype¡°
or CIMP. The existence of CIMP has been challenged
(Yamashita et al.,, 2003), but recent studies by Weisenberger et al. (2006) showing that a subset of CpG islands
is coordinately methylated in tumors argues, in our opinion, for the reality of such a phenotype. As will be discussed later, it is intriguing that many of these CIMP loci
are targets for polycomb group proteins (Widschwendter
et al,, 2007),

Surprising results have also been obtained with respect
togenome-widechanges in histone modifications. Loss of
acetylation at lysine 16 and trimethylation at I|ysine 20 of
histone H4 isacommon hallmark of human cancer (Fraga
etal., 2005),and global histone modification patterns predict the risk of prostate cancer recurrence (Seligson et al.,
2005). Otherevidence forglobal changes being involved in
carcinogenesis come from studies in the polycomb group
gene family, which is highly conserved throughout evolution (Valk-Lingbeek et al., 2004). The polycomb repressor
complex 2 (PRC2) is involved in the initiation of silencing
and contains histone methyltransferases that can methyl|ate histone H3 Iysine 9 and 27, which are marks of silenced chromatin. The significance of these findings wil
be discussed later. The polycomb gene BMI1, a component of PRC1, is overexpressed in several human cancers
sothatitmight be expected that aberrations in this system
would give rise to global alterations in gene silencing in
cancer (Valk-Lingbeek et al., 2004),

Iltiswellknownthat certain transcription factors such as
cC-Myc do not bind to their recognition seqguences in the
methylated condition, suggesting that CpG methylation
may affectthe ability of Myc to bind to multiple sites within
the genome. Given that Myc can influence chromatin
structure (Knoepfler et al., 2006), it is certainly plausible
that inappropriate methylation of its recognition sites
could have profound implications on the cancer epigenome. Perhaps more attention should be paid in the future
to methylation of such genomic regions.

Given the linkage between processes that regulate epigenetic silencing, it should not be surprising that such
changes are observed onagenome-wide scale (Figure 1),
Forexample, DNAmethylation and histone acetylation are
knownto be intimately linked,so that global hypomethylation might be expected to lead to global alterations in the
level of histone acetylation and vice versa. These rapidly

emerging data strongly indicate that the entire epigenome
is fundamentally disturbed in cancer development. While
the focus on research until recently has been on silencing,more attention is now being paid to the possibility
that these genome-wide changes in the structure of the
epigenome can lead to the genomic instability, that is
a hallmark of cancer (Cadieux et al., 2006),

Aberrant Gene Silencing during Early Neoplastic
Progression

A key to understanding the contributions of aberrant epigenetic gene silencing to cancer has been to consider
these in the context of their timing in cancer progression
just as has been done for genetic changes. Recent reviews (Baylin and Ohm, 2006; Feinberg et al,, 2006) have
emphasized that epigenetic abnormalities might play
a seminal role in the earliest steps in cancer initiation.
Abnormal gene imprinting andyor silencing may help push
the early aberrant clonal expansion of cells,providing
a¡°substrate¡°for risk of subsedguent genetic and epigenetic alterations that further foster tumor progression
(Baylin and Ohm, 2006; Feinberg et al., 2006). This concept is shown for colon cancer in Figure 2, in which risk
factors for common cancers such as aging (Sharpless
and DePinho,2005) and inflammation (Coussens and
Werb, 2002; Lu et al., 2006; Nelson et al., 2004) are depicted as causing such expansions in either normal colon
epithelial stem cells or precursor cells derived from them
A series of genes, all documented to exhibit DNA hypermethylation in preinvasive stages of colon and other cancers, but which are rarely mutated in such cancers, are
shown and referred to as¡°epigenetic gatekeepers.¡°|n
other words, the normal epigenetic modulation of these
genes allows them to prevent stem/precursor cells from
becoming immortalized and acquiring infinite cell renewal
capacity during periods of chronic stresses and renewal
pressures on cell systems. It also allows these genes to
be activated,as needed, whenstem/precursor cells differentiate. The inappropriate silencing ofthese genes blocks
theiractivation and allows forabnormal survival and clonal
expansion and prevents differentiation. Depicted also are
genes such as in APC or 6-catepnin involved as genetic
gatekeepers for colon cancer,since mutations foster
abnormal activation of the developmental Wnt pathway,
which playsacanonical role indriving colontumorigenesis
throughoutthe life history ofthesetumors.Inthe paradigm
shown,broaching of the epigenetic gatekeeper steps
allows cell expansion and time for the genetic gatekeeper
mutations to appear and even to undergo selection because the cells are now¡°addicted¡° to Wnt pathway activation (Baylin and Ohm, 2006),.

Howmightlossoffunction forthe epigenetic gatekeeper
genes actually foster early abnormal clonal expansion? As
shown in Figure 2, Wnt pathway activation may be a striking example where epigenetic events can play important
roles. First, APC,the classically mutated genetic gatekeeper gene in colon cancer leading to Wnt pathway activation (Kinzlerand Vogelstein, 1996),can be inactivated in

Cell 128, 683-692, February 23, 2007 @2007 Elsevier Inc.¡£ 685
