Stem _¡¿.=e__

Precursor
Precursor ]
C Ò»
Ce||

Normal
cel| renewal

16, SFFPs,

d a GATA-4 and -5, APC

gatekeepers

Preinvasive
cancer stem
cel

genetic
gatekeepers

APC, B-caten1n

Loss of [

Recurring genetic and
epigenetic abnormalities

Figure 2. An¡°Epigenetic Gatekeeper¡°Prevents Early Tumor
Progression

Epigenetic silencing of genes p16, SFRPs, GATA-4 and -5, and APC
(red X) in stem/precursor cells of adult cell-renewal systems may serve
to abnormally lock these cells into stem-like states that foster abnormal clonal expansion. These genes are termed¡°epigenetic gatekeepers¡° because their normal epigenetic pattern of expression
should allow them to be activated during stem/precursor cell differentiation as needed to properly control adult cell renewal. The repertoire
ofabnormal gene silencing then allows abnormal survivalofthe cells in
the setting of chronic stress, such as inflammation (see Figure 3). The
resulting preinvasive stem cells become¡°addicted¡°to the survival
pathways involved so that selection for mutations in genetic gatekeeper genes provide an even stronger stimulus for further tumor
progression. The bulk of the resulting tumor is composed of a subpopulation of cancer stem cells and neoplastic progeny:.

sporadictumors both by such mutations, or,occasionally,
epigenetic gene silencing (Esteller et al., 2000) (Figure 2),
Also,methylationon one allelecan alsoserveasa¡°¡°second
hit¡° for gene inactivation when paired with mutations on
the opposite allele (Esteller et al., 2001).Second,four
members of a family of genes, the SFRPs, which encode
proteins that antagonize the action of the Wnt ligand at

686 ¡° Cell 128, 683-~-692, February 23, 2007 @2007 EIlsevier InC.

the cell membrane,can be hypermethylated simultaneously in the majority of preinvasive lesions for colon
cancer (Suzuki et al.,2004). This silencing can foster
increased Wnt pathway signaling,which may precede
and addict cells toward evolving later mutations in the
downstream pathway genes, APC or 6-catepin, that further activate Wnt signaling to foster colon tumorigenesis
(Baylin and Ohm, 2006),

The tumor suppressor gene, pb16ink4A, is one of the
most common, and earliest, epigenetically mediated lossesoftumorsuppressorfunction events in human cancer.
This silencing begins in subsets of preinvasive stages of
breast, colon, Iung,and other cancers (Belinsky et al.,
1998; McDermott et al.,2006; Reynolds et al:.,2006).
Recent studies of knockout mice have revealed that
germline loss of this gene increases stem cell life span
(Janzen et al., 2006; Krishnamurthy et al., 2006; Molofsky
et al., 2006), consistent with a proposed role in tumorigenesis for facilitating early abnormal clonal expansion
of cells at risk for cancer. Indeed, loss of this gene is permissive for allowing such expanding cells to develop
genomic instability (Foster et al., 1998; Kiyono et al,, 1998)
and further epigenetic gene-silencing events (Reynolds
et al,, 2006),

The GATA-4 and -5 transcription factor genes are
important for both embryonic gastrointestinal epithelial
development and for maturation in adults (Gao et al.,
1998; Laverriere et al., 1994; Molkentin et al., 1997) and
are epigenetically silenced in virtually half of all ofthe preinvasive and invasive lesions for colon cancer (Akiyama
et al., 2003). This can then impede differentiation and
foster precursor cell expansion.

Finally, an intriguing abnormal survival circuit regulated
by epigenetic gene silencing concerns upregulation ofthe
survival protein, SIRT1,via loss of the transcription factor
HIC1, which is DNA hypermethylated in early preinvasive
lesions for colon tumorigenesis and many other common
cancers (Baylin and Ohm, 2006). HIC1, a transcriptional
repressor complexed with SIRT1,can downmodulate
SIRT1 promoter activity (Chen et al., 2005). The loss of
HIC1 function potentially sets off a network of survival
events, which are detailed later below (Figure 3),

Cancer Gene Silencing Versus Genetic Mutations

How does loss of function of cancer genes via epigenetic
silencing resemble,or differ from,genetically mediated
losses ofgene function? Gene mutations in a single tumor
are seldom multiple in a given cell pathway, since selection for one hit appears sufficient to produce full pathway
disruption (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000). Certainly, this
can sometimes also be the case for gene silencing as
found for classic tumor suppressor genes. Thus, in the
cyclin D-Rb pathway, silencing of pb16 does not appear
in tumors in which the Rb gene is mutated,since both
events powerfully disrupt cell-cycle control (Jones and
Baylin, 2002). Similarly, mutations in the VHL gene, seminal forrenal cancer pathogenesis,occur in 609%6 oftumors,
while the gene is DNA hypermethylated in another ~ Ò» 2006
